# Project Synopsis

  Hemigrapsus oregonensis, also known as hairy shore crabs, are intertidal invertabrates that live in the North Pacific. Being a type of decapod, their digestion is controlled through a stomatic ganglion which is an non concious nerve control. This control may be susceptible to temperature changes, as it was found within Green Crabs to increase gut transit time with higher temperatures. Similar decapods have been found to greatly decline in numbers due to an increase in temperatures within the water, leading to hightened metabolic rates that outpaced caloric intake. Ultimately this led to the massive mortality event in a 2022 marine heatwave with commercially important species, the Snow Crab and King Crab. This event highlights the interest for investigating glucose metabolism during thermal stress. How does thermal stress affect glucose levels in Hemigrapsus oregonensis under different feeding states? We aim to understand how glucose levels may vary between nutrient state and thermal stress, additionally assessing the use of a glucometer a widely minimally invasive tool used to determine glucose levels. 
  Four tank groups of treatments were set up with five crabs in each tank. Two tanks corresponding to a fed and fasted group within a natural habitat like temperature of 13°C, and another two tanks of a fed and fasted group in a stress inducing high temperature of 27°C. Food was provided to the two fed groups in the different temperatures prior to taking five glucose readings at 30 minute increments. 
Glucometer results demonstrated low undetectable levels of glucose, which displayed "lo" on the screen meaning it was <20 mg/dL. This is due to the level of glucose was lower than the detectable range of 20-600 mg/dL, however one reading in the fed 13°C group was 22mg/dL. Glucose assay results showed varying trends across all groups (all readings were under 0.4 mg/dL), a prevelant trend is the two fed groups ended with higher glucose levels compared to the fasted ones. Fed 27°C group had a sharp decrease in glucose levels compared to the fed 13°C, which may align with previous findings of transit time being increased leading to the faster depletion of glucose within the hemolymph. The fasted 27°C had higher glucose levels than the fasted 13°C which may be due to a stress response release of Crustacean Hyperglycemic Hormone from being within a high temperature environment. 
  Our findings demonstrate varying trends of glucose levels present between different temperatures. The use of the glucometer was partially successful from being able to read and determine the hemolymph glucose levels being fairly low. Although the one reading of the 13°C group was within the range of detection for the glucometer, it did not match with the value of the glucose assay. However this reading confirmed that the fed 13°C was similar in both the glucometer and the glucose assay for being the highest reading out of all groups. As climate change persists, there is a need for more research and the use of available tools for determining population health through metabolic parameters. 

